[AUDIO LOGO]
>> Biohacking, it's not
just about being well.
It's about being more than well.
It's the power to
transform yourself.
Are we ready?
I'm Dave Asprey, and
this is biohacking.
Hi.
I'm Dave Asprey.
In this episode, you're
going to learn some things
about hacking hormones.
And hormone levels are
a part of biohacking,
because if those don't
work, you don't work.
When I weighed 300 pounds,
I had my picture published
in entrepreneur magazine,
and my testosterone levels
were lower than my
mother's because
of environmental toxins, because
of not knowing how to sleep,
because of eating the wrong
foods, because of overtraining.
And when I learned how to
hack my hormone levels,
it helped me to
get my brain back.
I'm going to guide you
through best practices,
when it comes to testing for
hormones and even hormone
replacement therapy.
In most parts of
the world, you want
to work with a doctor on
hormone replacement therapy,
but you can get
your levels, and you
can change your life so your
hormones will work better.
All of that is in this episode.
Hormones are just
chemical messengers
that tell your cells what to
do and how to do it and when.
They affect everything,
how you feel,
how much you like your
partner, how much to eat
how many calories, you
should store as fat,
even whether you're going
to have emotions that you
can control or not control.
If you want to stay young, you
have to have hormones that work
and hormones that work
like a young person.
Hormones interact
with each other.
So if you change one, the other
ones will automatically change.
So it's a complex system.
And I want to
start with hormones
that aren't the common ones,
like testosterone and estrogen.
But these are the hormones that
control hunger and satiety.
If you can regulate those, you
won't be hungry all the time,
and then you'll eat
the right foods.
And that will, in turn,
affect your sex hormones.
One of the hormones that
really matters is leptin.
And leptin regulates
your metabolism,
and it signals you
to stop eating.
So this is the I'm full.
And there's also
a hunger hormone
called ghrelin,
which is something
that basically says I'm hungry.
So you could get
enough animal protein
to turn off ghrelin, which will
also affect your leptin levels.
What that means is having
30 grams of animal protein
when you're eating a meal
could magically turn off hunger
for several hours afterwards.
And that's because
you're directly
manipulating your hunger
and satiety hormone.
There's also something
called cholecystokinin,
which is a satiety
hormone that's
released by your
intestines after you eat.
Saturated fat helps
raise CCK levels.
This is one reason a little
bit of grass-fed butter
in your coffee or MCT
oil could go a long way
towards making you not hungry.
So all these
biohacking techniques
are actually hormone
manipulation techniques.
There's also
insulin, and insulin
is released when you eat,
especially carbohydrates.
And it's the key that
unlocks a cell that
lets blood sugar into the cell.
So you need some insulin.
In fact, insulin
is required if you
want to put on muscle because
insulin, like growth factor,
is called that because
insulin makes you grow.
One of the things that
happens with our hormones
is that we become
resistant to insulin,
and this is when insulin
approaches a cell
and tries to turn
the key, but the cell
won't open up, so your
blood sugar levels rise.
That's basically what happens
when you get type 2 diabetes.
So what's causing that?
Well, it turns out bad fats,
the omega 6 fats from plants
are the likely culprit, but so
is not knowing how to sleep.
What do you do about it?
Well, you could reverse
insulin resistance
by practicing
intermittent fasting
and doing exercise, but
not too much, the way
you would learn in
the fitness episode.
If you eat the anti-inflammatory
diet in the nutrition episode,
you avoid a lot
of refined carbs,
like sugar and
white flour and stop
eating artificial sweeteners
and artificial flavorings.
Add in that
intermittent fasting,
practice some good sleep
practices, and move every day
and exercise a
couple times a week,
you might find that
you've magically
fixed your insulin problem.
You could even go so long as
to get a continuous glucose
monitor, like this
one, that lets
you look at what your blood
sugar is any time of the day.
Then, you know, is
insulin my problem,
or is it not my problem?
It's pretty easy to
figure that out these days
If your hunger hormones
are out of whack
and you're hungry all the
time, and you think about food
with half your thoughts, you
could do the leptin reset
that I write about.
Every morning, you start
your day with between,
believe it or not,
this is from a study
28 to 50 grams of high
quality animal protein.
So this is for
one or two months.
Because you're
hungry all the time,
because you have weight to
lose, that's several eggs.
That's a piece of meat in
the morning or a good quality
animal-based protein powder.
That is going to completely
change the way your insulin
hormone works.
And in addition to that, when
you change your insulin levels,
you'll find that your leptin,
because this is a leptin reset,
leptin controls your thyroid.
Your thyroid, which we're
going to talk about next,
is the master hormone that
controls your thermostat.
So if your body
needs lots of energy,
you want it to
burn all the food,
if you have enough
thyroid, you will do that.
You'll have lots of energy.
And if you're low thyroid,
you don't have enough energy.
And therefore, you
don't have enough energy
to get off the couch and go
do something that matters.
Thyroid is a complex hormone,
but one that is off, probably,
in half of people right now.
I was diagnosed with
Hashimoto's thyroiditis
when I was 26 years old.
My thyroid levels were
nearly undetectable.
And the first time I had
prescription thyroid,
I just remember this feeling.
The lights turned back on.
It was so dramatic.
I actually developed a fear
of not having my thyroid
medication with me because
it made such a difference.
It was so precious
to get my brain back,
to get my energy back,
and this was a part of it.
In your body, you manufacture
something called T4 hormone.
And then your liver, your
kidney, your muscles,
your thyroid gland
convert T4 into T3.
And when your body has T3,
that helps your mitochondria
create electricity and ATP.
So T4 and T3 regulate
your metabolic rate.
So the body says
inside the brain,
I think I need more energy.
And it asks for the energy
with something called TSH.
It responds with T4.
And if everything
works right, T4
turns into 23 which then makes
your body have a ton of energy.
But sometimes, there's a
problem because that T4 that's
supposed to turn into T3
turns into a reverse T3 which
slows things down.
And that means, it's like
you put gas in your car,
but some of the gas
never goes to the engine,
and you wonder why
it's not working.
And your body, in response
to that, may raise your TSH.
Your body will keep asking
for more and more thyroid
until it gets released.
We can measure TSH.
It's very affordable.
And that's the first
line simple thyroid.
If your TSH is above
1, you probably
have an energy
problem, and that's
why your pants
keep getting tight,
and you can get that
treated by a doctor
or even use some
natural approaches
that we'll talk about here.
The other thing that's
just endemic, if you're
exposed to toxic mold, if you
eat wheat and commercial dairy
and lots of other things,
it can cause your body
to make antibodies to your
own thyroid which means you
make less hormone production.
That's called Hashimoto's.
That's what I had.
It's an autoimmune disease.
If your thyroid is low, brain
fog, depression, fatigue,
and unexplained weight gain.
And when you have
low thyroid, it
doesn't matter how
much you exercise
or how few calories you
eat, you will not burn them.
It's one of the reasons
I couldn't lose weight
after a year and a half
of working out six days
a week for 90 minutes.
And I just felt like a failure.
My thyroid was a
major part of that.
The other thing that happens is
if you're on a low calorie diet
and you're on an excessive
exercise plan like that,
or if you're on a
long-term Keto diet,
or if you're over fasting, your
body will lower your T3 levels,
and then your metabolic
rate slows down.
There are also
environmental toxins
that lower thyroid
hormones, things
like flame retardance
in your mattress, things
like bromine in bread can be
things that lower your thyroid.
If you're over 40,
your thyroid is already
starting to slow down.
You can supplement that
to bring it back up.
Iodine controls your
thyroid function.
It's a mineral, and most of
us don't get enough iodine.
You can get it from kelp
powder, which tastes gross.
You can get it from
seafood and eggs.
And I recommend supplementing
at a very minimum
of 150 micrograms per day.
I take closer to
a milligram a day,
which is about six
times that amount.
If your health plan will pay
for it or you're ordering online
where it's very
affordable, you should
ask for TSH, 3 T4, 3 T3, reverse
T3, and thyroid antibodies.
That's called a
complete thyroid panel.
If the numbers come in and
say, oh, you're within range,
but you're at the lower
end for any of those,
and you have the symptoms
of hypothyroidism,
it's called subclinical
hypothyroidism.
That means that especially
if your TSH is slightly
elevated, that you
probably will do well
on a little bit of
thyroid replacement.
And you should work
with a doctor on that.
I just cannot express how
different It felt when I went
on it.
And all of a sudden,
my exercise started
making a difference again.
Before, it was this feeling
of helplessness where
I'm just tired all the time.
My career was taking off.
I made and lost $6
million before I was 28,
and I was never so tired.
And when I got thyroid
back into my life,
I started losing weight,
but my brain turned on.
So if this is a hormone
problem for you.
You've got to look at it.
And if you're, again, over 40
or even in your 50s or 60s,
sometimes, just a little
bit of thyroid hormone
makes you feel young again.
It's an anti-aging
hormone, so get tested.
And it's OK to ask your
functional medicine
doctor about getting a
prescription for thyroid
hormone replacement.
What you're going to find is
that if it works, it's magic.
And if it doesn't
make any difference,
then it isn't what you needed.
By now, you're probably
thinking about, well,
what about the big hormones--
testosterone, estrogen?
Don't worry.
We're going to get there.
But your stress hormones are
affecting your sex hormones,
so let's talk about those first.
Your adrenal glands
sit above your kidneys.
They make a majorly important
hormone called cortisol.
Now, you've probably heard
that cortisol is stress.
Cortisol is a bad hormone.
Cortisol regulates blood sugar.
It influences your
memory and learning.
It controls your
electrolyte balance,
and it plays a big role in
regulating your metabolism.
Cortisol is not good or bad.
You really want
well-functioning cortisol.
So sometimes, it should be high,
sometimes it should be low,
depending on what's
happening in your life.
It's when it's always
high or always low
that you get into
serious problems.
Chronic low level stress
causes your adrenals
to pump out too much cortisol
for long periods of time.
So your body's always tweaked.
You feel anxiety from cortisol.
And after a while, your adrenals
get tired of doing this.
You run out of the
minerals and the cofactors.
And now, your body switches
over to low cortisol.
So you're tired all the
time, and you actually
get infections, like viral
infections, sinus infections,
and you don't heal well.
When you have adrenal
burnout like that,
it feels like exhaustion,
brain fog, lack of motivation,
and just these really
strong sugar cravings, which
I definitely used to have.
The most comprehensive test
for cortisol function is called
the Dutch test, like Dutch
Apple pie, just D-U-T-C-H.
It stands for dried urine test
for comprehensive hormones,
and it's relatively complex
and relatively expensive,
but it works.
Adrenaline is
related to cortisol,
and it's released when there's
a fight or flight response.
And when you have too much
adrenaline on a regular basis,
it messes with your
digestion because your body
isn't going to digest
food when it thinks
there's a tiger chasing you.
So all resources go to fight or
flight, not to rest and repair.
And adrenaline will lower
your immune system function.
So how do you control
cortisol and adrenaline?
Well, breathwork,
meditation, neurofeedback,
adaptogenic herbs.
And you can even
check out the episode
about recovery and resilience.
And on Gaia, you're
in the right place.
There's so much you
can learn about this.
You can directly control
your stress response,
which can help.
But if your adrenals are low,
adding salt or electrolytes
containing salts to
your water all day
long, especially in the morning,
can make a huge difference.
Adrenal cortex, which is
a supplement you can take,
can help.
And you might even see a doctor
about cortisol replacement
therapy while you get
your adrenals back online.
Now it's time for the big guns--
estrogen and progesterone.
Don't worry, testosterone
is coming next.
Estrogen regulates,
obviously, your monthly cycle,
but it also controls
hunger, insulin sensitivity,
and it helps you metabolize
cholesterol and controls
bone density.
And guys, you make
estrogen also.
It helps to regulate
your libido,
and you don't develop
sperm without estrogen.
So estrogen is not a
female or a male hormone,
it's a human hormone
just like testosterone.
In women, low estrogen will
cause menopause symptoms,
changes vaginally, painful sex
and urination, hot flashes,
moodiness, irregular periods,
and, this is very important,
brain fog.
In those cases, usually,
estrogen dominance
is the issue, which
is too much estrogen.
And that can even lead to
fibroids, endometriosis,
anxiety, reduced sex
drive, really bad PMS,
or gaining weight
that just won't
respond to the things
that used to work.
When men have
estrogen dominance,
this is something that I
definitely had in my 20s,
you get man boobs.
You get erectile dysfunction,
which I was a little concerned
about in my 20s, but I am
not concerned about today,
and infertility.
Fortunately, for me, I
saw an anti-aging doctor
when I was 26 years old, who
got my hormones under control,
or I wouldn't have
two kids today.
Estrogen dominance
is common in women
due to industrial chemical
hormonal birth control,
as well as xenoestrogens, things
like parabens, phthalates,
benzophenones,
fragrances, pesticides.
So there's a ton
of things mimicking
estrogen in the environment.
And birth control pills
are the number one cause
of hormone
dysregulation in women.
There are many safe
forms of birth control.
Hormonal birth control,
chemical, industrial pills
are not a safe form
of birth control
if you want to live a long time
and have functioning hormones.
And then there's your tap water.
The environmental working
group identified 45 hormone
disrupting chemicals in
public drinking water,
including birth control pills.
So these are not good for
the environment or for you.
So obviously, you should
drink bottled water,
except there are estrogenic
chemicals in plastic as well.
So in an ideal world, you
have good filtered water,
and you drink water
out of glass bottles.
But the world isn't
perfect, so you
want to watch the
episode on detoxing
because you can do something
about those estrogen-like
chemicals.
If you have estrogen
dominance, you
want to look at
chronic stress and how
that throws off hormone balance
and learn the stress management
techniques.
And you look at progesterone,
which is another hormone that
helps regulate menstrual
cycles in women,
and it also helps you
to have bone density.
But in men, progesterone
is necessary
for testosterone production.
And progesterone
is neuroprotective.
It's got a lot of functions in
your central nervous system.
Around myelination,
that insulating
layer that goes on every nerve,
even the nerves in your arms
and your legs, but
especially in your brain,
it protects neurons.
It modulates neurons, and it
controls learning, memory,
and mood.
So progesterone is way more
important than just a sex
hormone.
Progesterone balances
estrogen. And if you
don't have enough progesterone,
your estrogen can go haywire.
So for men and women,
sometimes, progesterone
is something that
benefits your brain
and is a level you want to
get tested on a lab test.
Another major sex hormone that
we don't hear about very much
is something called
pregnenolone,
and we like to call
that the mother hormone.
Because it's a hormone that can
turn into many other hormones.
So it's a precursor to your
stress hormones and your sex
hormones, and it'll go
wherever the demand is.
So if you take pregnenolone,
it could support adrenals,
or it could support
testosterone or estrogen.
Ideally, pregnenolone
should help
you to make progesterone
and just enough cortisol.
But when you're
stressed, the body
snaps up all that
pregnenolone, and then you
don't get the progesterone.
And then you end up having
not enough progesterone
to balance out your estrogen.
And finally, the most famous
sex hormone, testosterone, which
has a bad name sometimes.
Keep in mind, this is a
necessary hormone for life.
It's necessary for men and
women at different levels.
It regulates sex
differentiation.
It produces male
characteristics,
and it's important in
fertility in men and women.
So women with no testosterone
don't have babies.
It's very important
that you have enough.
Testosterone also
improves your mood.
It improves muscle growth.
But if you're a woman taking
normal levels of testosterone,
whether because you
manufacture them internally
or because working
with your doctor,
you realize you were
low on testosterone,
so you use a patch
or a cream, if you do
that, you will not get bulky.
But in men, we will get
bulky because our levels
are very different.
It also stimulates red
blood cell formation.
That change in mood is dramatic.
It also makes you motivated,
and it makes you confident.
So we talked about
thyroid earlier.
Thyroid is the
hormone of energy.
Testosterone is the
hormone of motivation.
You put the two together
in men and women,
and you get people who
will change the world
by changing themselves first.
And that's why biohacking
is so important.
One thing that
testosterone does in women
is it enhances interest
in initiating sex,
and it improves response
to sexual stimulation.
In other words, it gives
you better orgasms.
It's also associated
with reduced anxiety
and reduced depression
and increased
feelings of well-being.
In men and women, testosterone
levels decline with age,
and low testosterone and
women equals low libido.
And birth control messes with
testosterone levels, not just
estrogen levels.
Testosterone levels
decrease in men, for sure.
And when we have low
testosterone, reduced
sexual activity and
desire, loss of body hair,
reduced bone mass, decreased
fertility, decreased energy
and motivation, depression,
poor concentration and memory,
sleep disturbances, muscle
loss, and generally you
feel like life sucks and
there's no reason for doing it.
If You've ever seen the
movie "Grumpy Old Men,"
it was pretty much a documentary
on testosterone deficiency.
You don't have to go there as
you age as a man or a woman.
Have the hormone levels
of a healthy 30-year-old
when you're 130, and you will
very much like your life.
The problem with things like
progesterone and pregnenolone
and estrogen and
testosterone is that it
takes a while for a deficiency
or an imbalance to show up.
And besides aging, the main
cause of low testosterone
is toxins in the environment.
Men who had the highest amount
of high pesticide produce
had 49% lower total
sperm count compared
to men who had the least
non-organic produce.
Scientific studies
show a clear link
between low fat diets
and plant-based diets
and lower testosterone in men.
That may be because plant-based
diets have more pesticides,
or it could be because
they lack the right fats
and proteins for men and women.
Vitamin D levels appear to
increase testosterone levels,
which means go out in the sun
or take some vitamin D. That's
vitamin D, A, K, E
in order to optimize
your testosterone levels.
There are lots of
studies that show
testosterone replacement will
improve sexual function, mood,
muscle function, and
body composition in men.
It does not increase
cancer risk.
It lowers cancer risk
when it's bioidentical
at appropriate doses.
People sometimes have this
idea that testosterone
is bad for you, or you
get testosterone poisoning
or something like that.
In the 1970s, bodybuilders
used synthetic testosterone
chemicals that were like
testosterone, but not the same,
and there were media
stories of roid rage and all
this crazy stuff.
That's not how it works.
When you use the same hormone
that mother nature designed
you to do, and you help mother
nature to put that hormone back
in balance, because your
environment took it out
of balance, you are someone
who is resilient and powerful.
And who knows what you might do?
That's why you're
here to biohack.
So what did you do to take
control of all these things?
Number one, get your
hormones tested.
Do an advanced hormone panel.
And if you're young,
get your baseline now.
Because the normal levels
could be very different.
So what makes you feel
great when you're 25?
If you know that
level, when you're 125,
you can still have that level.
But if you just
guess, like I did--
I never had healthy
hormones as a kid because
of environmental toxins
and mold and all the stuff
I've talked about.
So I have guessing at my levels.
But I've got them dialed in
after a lot of just playing
around with them.
If you know your
levels because you
did a test when
you were 25, great.
Now, you know.
Or maybe you're 35, and
you still feel good.
Great.
Now, you know.
But when you get tested
at 35, and you realize
your thyroid is a little
low and your sex hormones
are a little
imbalanced, you probably
can use supplements
and take some iodine.
You'll be fine.
But if you wait
until they crash.
And suddenly, you
have muffin top,
and your brain doesn't work,
and your hair fallen out,
maybe you could
have done better.
If you have a lot of
stress in your life
and you think you may
have adrenal dysfunction,
the symptoms I talked about,
you could order a DUTCH test
or work with a functional
medicine doctor.
And something that's free,
that's really important,
that affects hormones in a way
it's even hard to comprehend
is just getting quality sleep.
I did not say sleeping
eight hours a night.
Make sure you watch the episode
on sleep because I teach you
that 6 and 1/2 hours is
probably the right number.
But when you get enough
deep sleep in the time
you sleep, your growth hormones,
your cortisol, your leptin,
the hunger hormones,
they all become improved.
So without any
money spent at all,
you could just learn how to
get better quality sleep,
and your hormones will improve.
You also want to watch
the fitness episode.
Because in it, I described how
high intensity exercise or even
something called reheat
can increase growth hormone
and testosterone
in men and women
without taking a lot of time.
There's also a role for deep
breathing and mindfulness.
And you can find that in the
episode on mindfulness here.
And on Gaia, there's
dozens of things
you could learn about
breathing and mindfulness.
Any of them are going to
reduce your excess cortisol
and your stress hormones.
You've got to have
your vitamin DAKE.
Vitamin D, A, K, E is important
because it contains precursors
for the creation of
testosterone and human growth
hormone and estrogen. So
give your body what it needs,
the building blocks
to make your hormones.
It'll work better.
You could consider
ashwagandha and holy basil
which are adaptogens that
can improve sex drive
and reduce stress.
Make sure you watch
the nutrition episode
because the diet there,
which includes carbohydrates
and includes saturated fat
and cycling of carbohydrates,
is shown to improve
testosterone levels.
And one of the things
I'm seeing today.
Because intermittent fasting has
become more and more popular,
is if you're over fasting,
especially for women,
but it happens to men, too, or
overtraining and under-eating,
your hormones will
stop working well
because your body is stressed.
If you exercise a lot,
you need to eat a lot.
And you will not get fat.
You will not get bulky.
If you start getting fat,
because you're eating a lot
and exercising, then
something else is wrong,
and you need to figure
out what that is.
Saturated fat, the kind that
is only found in animals
is the building block for all
hormone creation in your body.
Your body can manufacture
some of those,
but it's very
difficult. Research
shows that male athletes
who eat saturated fat
and some monounsaturated fat
and eat cholesterol, usually
in the form of eggs, have
higher testosterone levels.
Runny egg yolks will
increase your testosterone
for most people, as long as
you're not allergic to eggs.
Filter your water.
Get the xenoestrogens out.
Make sure you watch the episode
on detoxing, where I teach you
about the triple G detox
protocol that includes
calcium-D-glucarate,
glutathione, and glycine,
because these help your
body clear extra estrogen.
And that is a major
way, especially in men,
of not having man boobs.
I do not have man boobs now.
I have had man boobs for
more than half of my life,
and I didn't have to have
any surgery to do it.
It's because I manage
my estrogen levels.
It's really nice to
not have man boobs.
Let me just tell you.
Also, eat organic when you can.
I didn't say eat organic plants.
I just said eat organic,
because you need meat
to have healthy hormone levels.
Work with a functional
medicine doctor
or a hormone expert for
hormone replacement therapy.
Because, sometimes, that's the
best way to biohack yourself,
take control of
your own biology.
When you have control
of your own biology,
you can build energy in a way
that it's hard to express.
When you have that
energy from your thyroid,
you're like, all right,
I've got the power.
But if you have power
and no desire, who cares?
And then you get
the testosterone
and in balance with estrogen.
And then I've got the power,
and I've got the desire.
And when you do that,
it's going to give you
a desire to meditate.
It's going to give you
a desire to do something
nice for another person.
It's going to give you a
desire to evolve yourself.
But if you don't have
the power, and you
don't have the hormones of
desire, everything feels hard.
That was my life
when I was young,
and that is not my life today.
I want you to have
this kind of life.
I'm Dave Asprey, and
this is biohacking.